THE LIFTED VEIL 


     The time of my end approaches.  I have lately been subject to attacks 
of angina pectoris; and in the ordinary course of things, my physician tells 
me,  I   may   fairly  hope   that   my  life   will   not   be   protracted   many   months. 
Unless, then, I am cursed with an exceptional physical constitution, as   I 
am cursed with an exceptional mental character, I shall not much longer 
groan under the wearisome burthen of this earthly existence.                  If it were to 
be otherwise--if I were to live on to the age most men desire and provide 
for--I   should    for   once   have    known     whether     the  miseries    of   delusive 
expectation   can   outweigh   the   miseries   of   true   provision.   For   I   foresee 
when I shall die, and everything that will happen in my last moments. 
     Just a month from this day, on September 20, 1850, I shall be sitting in 
this   chair,   in   this   study,  at   ten   o'clock   at   night, longing   to   die,   weary  of 
incessant insight and foresight, without delusions and without hope.                    Just 
as I am watching a tongue of blue flame rising in the fire, and my lamp is 
burning low, the horrible contraction will begin at my chest.                  I shall only 
have   time   to   reach   the   bell,   and   pull   it   violently,   before   the   sense   of 
suffocation will come.          No one will answer my bell.             I know why. My 
two servants are lovers, and will have quarrelled.                My housekeeper will 
have rushed out of the house in a fury, two hours before, hoping that Perry 
will believe she has gone to drown herself.              Perry is alarmed at last, and 
is gone out after her.       The little scullery-maid is asleep on a bench:              she 
never answers   the bell; it   does   not   wake   her.      The sense of   suffocation 
increases: my lamp goes out with a horrible stench:                I make a great effort, 
and   snatch   at   the   bell   again.  I   long   for   life,   and   there   is   no   help. I 
thirsted   for   the unknown:       the   thirst   is gone.  O  God,  let   me   stay  with 
the   known,     and   be   weary    of  it:  I   am   content.    Agony      of  pain   and 
suffocation--and all the while the earth, the fields, the pebbly brook at the 
bottom   of    the   rookery,   the   fresh   scent  after   the  rain,  the   light  of  the 
morning through my chamber-window, the warmth of the hearth after the 
frosty air--will darkness close over them for ever? 
     Darkness--darkness--no pain--nothing but darkness:                 but I am passing 
on and on through the darkness:               my thought stays in the darkness,  but 
always with a sense of moving onward . . . 
     Before   that   time   comes,   I   wish   to   use   my   last   hours   of   ease   and 
strength in telling the strange story of my experience.                  I have never fully 
unbosomed myself to any human being; I have never been encouraged to 
trust much in the sympathy of my fellow-men.                   But we have all a chance 
of meeting with some pity, some   tenderness, some charity,  when we   are 
dead:     it is the living only who cannot be forgiven--the living only from 
whom   men's   indulgence   and   reverence   are   held   off,   like   the   rain   by  the 
hard     east   wind.     While      the   heart    beats,   bruise    it--it  is  your    only 
opportunity;   while   the   eye   can   still   turn   towards   you   with   moist,   timid 
entreaty,     freeze   it  with   an   icy   unanswering       gaze;   while    the   ear,  that 
delicate messenger to the inmost sanctuary of the soul, can still take in the 
tones of kindness, put it off with hard civility, or sneering compliment, or 
envious affectation of indifference; while the creative brain can still throb 
with   the  sense  of   injustice,  with the   yearning   for brotherly  recognition-- 
make haste--oppress it with your ill- considered judgements, your trivial 
comparisons, your careless misrepresentations.                  The heart will by and by 
be   still--"ubi   saeva   indignatio   ulterius   cor   lacerare   nequit";   the   eye   will 
cease to entreat; the ear will be deaf; the brain will have ceased from all 
wants as well as from all work.             Then your charitable speeches may find 
vent; then   you   may remember   and   pity the toil and the struggle   and the 
failure; then you may give due honour to the work achieved; then you may 
find extenuation for errors, and may consent to bury them. 
     That   is   a   trivial   schoolboy   text;   why   do   I   dwell   on   it? It   has   little 
reference to me, for I shall leave no works behind me for men to honour. 
I have no near relatives who will make up, by weeping over my grave, for 
the wounds they inflicted on me when I was among them.                         It is only the 
story    of   my    life  that  will   perhaps     win   a   little  more    sympathy      from 
strangers when I am dead, than I ever believed it would obtain from my 
friends while I was living. 
     My   childhood   perhaps   seems   happier   to   me   than   it   really   was,   by 
contrast with all the after-years.          For then the curtain of the future was as 
impenetrable   to   me   as   to   other   children:      I   had   all   their   delight   in   the 
present   hour,   their   sweet   indefinite   hopes   for   the   morrow;   and   I   had   a 
tender   mother:      even   now,   after   the   dreary  lapse   of   long   years,   a   slight 
trace of sensation accompanies the remembrance of her caress as she held 
me on her knee--her arms round my little body, her cheek pressed on mine. 
I had a complaint of the eyes that made me blind for a little while, and she 
kept me on her knee from morning till night.                That unequalled love soon 
vanished out of my life, and even to my childish consciousness it was as if 
that life had become more chill I rode my little white pony with the groom 
by  my   side   as   before,   but   there   were  no   loving   eyes   looking   at   me   as   I 
mounted,   no   glad   arms   opened   to   me   when   I   came   back.         Perhaps   I 
missed my mother's love more than most children of seven or eight would 
have done, to whom the other pleasures of life remained as before; for I 
was     certainly    a  very   sensitive    child.    I   remember      still  the   mingled 
trepidation   and   delicious   excitement   with   which   I   was   affected   by   the 
tramping of the horses on the pavement in the echoing stables, by the loud 
resonance of the groom's voices, by the booming bark of the dogs as my 
father's carriage thundered under the archway of the courtyard, by the din 
of the gong as it gave notice of luncheon and dinner. The measured tramp 
of   soldiery   which   I   sometimes   heard--for   my   father's   house   lay   near   a 
county town where there were large barracks--made me sob and tremble; 
and yet when they were gone past, I longed for them to come back again. 
     I fancy my father thought me an odd child, and had little fondness for 
me; though he was very careful in fulfilling what he regarded as a parent's 
duties.    But he was already past the middle of life, and I was not his only 
son.    My   mother   had   been   his   second   wife,   and   he   was   five-and-forty 
when he married her.          He was a firm, unbending, intensely orderly man, 
in   root   and   stem   a  banker,    but   with   a  flourishing    graft   of  the  active 
landholder,   aspiring   to   county   influence:       one   of   those   people   who   are 
always   like   themselves   from   day   to   day,   who   are   uninfluenced   by   the 
weather,   and   neither   know   melancholy   nor   high   spirits.        I   held   him   in 
great awe, and appeared more timid and sensitive in his presence than at 
other times; a circumstance which, perhaps, helped to confirm him in the 
intention to educate me on a different plan from the prescriptive one with 
which he had complied in the case of my elder brother, already a tall youth 
at Eton.     My brother was to be his representative and successor; he must 
go   to   Eton   and   Oxford,   for   the   sake   of   making   connexions,   of   course: 
my   father   was   not   a   man   to   underrate   the   bearing   of   Latin   satirists   or 
Greek      dramatists     on   the  attainment      of  an   aristocratic    position.     But, 
intrinsically,   he   had   slight   esteem   for   "those   dead   but   sceptred   spirits"; 
having qualified   himself   for   forming   an   independent   opinion   by  reading 
Potter's AEschylus, and dipping into Francis's Horace.                     To this negative 
view     he   added    a  positive    one,   derived    from   a   recent    connexion      with 
mining   speculations;   namely,   that   a   scientific   education   was   the   really 
useful    training    for   a  younger     son.   Moreover,      it  was   clear   that  a  shy, 
sensitive boy like me was not fit to encounter the rough experience of a 
public school.       Mr. Letherall had said so very decidedly.                 Mr. Letherall 
was a large man in spectacles, who one day took my small head between 
his large hands, and pressed it here and there in an exploratory, auspicious 
manner--then placed each of his great thumbs on my temples, and pushed 
me a little way from him, and stared at me with glittering spectacles.                     The 
contemplation appeared to displease him, for he frowned sternly, and said 
to my father, drawing his thumbs across my eyebrows - 
     "The deficiency is there, sir--there; and here," he added, touching the 
upper sides of my head, "here is the excess.               That must be brought out, sir, 
and this must be laid to sleep." 
     I was in a state of tremor, partly at the vague idea that I was the object 
of reprobation, partly in the agitation of my first hatred-- hatred of this big, 
spectacled   man,   who   pulled   my   head   about   as   if   he   wanted   to   buy   and 
cheapen it. 
     I   am   not   aware   how   much   Mr.   Letherall   had   to   do   with   the   system 
afterwards   adopted   towards   me,   but   it   was   presently   clear   that   private 
tutors,    natural    history,   science,     and   the   modern      languages,     were    the 
appliances by which the defects of my organization were to be remedied. 
I  was   very  stupid   about   machines, so   I  was   to   be   greatly  occupied   with 
them; I had no memory for classification, so it was particularly necessary 
that   I  should    study   systematic      zoology   and     botany;   I   was    hungry   for 
human   deeds   and   humane   motions,   so   I   was   to   be   plentifully   crammed 
with the mechanical powers, the elementary bodies, and the phenomena of 
electricity and magnetism.          A better-constituted boy would certainly have 
profited   under   my   intelligent   tutors,   with   their   scientific   apparatus;   and 
would, doubtless, have found the phenomena of electricity and magnetism 
as fascinating as I was, every Thursday, assured they were.                   As it was, I 
could have paired off, for ignorance of whatever was taught me, with the 
worst   Latin   scholar   that   was   ever   turned   out   of   a   classical   academy.  I 
read Plutarch, and Shakespeare, and Don Quixote by the sly, and supplied 
myself in that way with wandering thoughts, while my tutor was assuring 
me that "an improved man, as distinguished from an ignorant one, was a 
man who knew the reason why water ran downhill."                      I had no desire to 
be this improved man; I was glad of the running water; I could watch it 
and listen to it gurgling among the pebbles, and bathing the bright green 
water-plants, by the hour together.           I did not want to know WHY it ran; I 
had perfect confidence that there were good reasons for what was so very 
beautiful. 
     There is no need to dwell on this part of my life.              I have said enough 
to indicate that my nature was of the sensitive, unpractical order, and that 
it   grew   up   in   an   uncongenial   medium,   which   could   never   foster   it   into 
happy, healthy development.            When I was sixteen I was sent to Geneva to 
complete my course of education; and the change was a very happy one to 
me,   for   the   first   sight   of   the Alps,   with   the   setting   sun   on   them,   as   we 
descended the Jura,   seemed   to   me   like an   entrance into   heaven;   and   the 
three years of my life there were spent in a perpetual sense of exaltation, 
as if from a draught of delicious wine, at the presence of Nature in all her 
awful loveliness.        You will think, perhaps, that I must have been a poet, 
from this early sensibility to Nature.          But my lot was not so happy as that. 
A   poet    pours   forth   his  song   and   BELIEVES        in  the   listening   ear  and 
answering soul, to which his song will be floated sooner or later.                  But the 
poet's sensibility without his voice--the poet's sensibility that finds no vent 
but in silent tears on the sunny bank, when the noonday light sparkles on 
the water, or in an inward shudder at the sound of harsh human tones, the 
sight of a cold human eye--this dumb passion brings with it a fatal solitude 
of   soul   in   the   society   of   one's   fellow-men. My   least   solitary   moments 
were   those   in   which   I   pushed   off   in   my   boat,   at   evening,   towards   the 
centre of the lake; it seemed to me that the sky, and the glowing mountain- 
tops, and the wide blue water, surrounded me with a cherishing love such 
as no human face had shed on me since my mother's love had vanished out 
of my life.     I used to do as Jean Jacques did--lie down in my boat and let 
it glide where it would, while I looked up at the departing glow leaving 
one   mountain-top   after   the other,   as   if   the   prophet's   chariot of   fire   were 
passing over them on its way to the home of light.               Then, when the white 
summits were all sad and corpse-like, I had to push homeward, for I was 
under   careful   surveillance,   and   was   allowed   no   late   wanderings.       This 
disposition     of   mine   was    not  favourable     to  the   formation     of  intimate 
friendships among the numerous youths of my own age who are always to 
be   found   studying   at   Geneva.      Yet   I   made   ONE   such   friendship;   and, 
singularly enough, it was with a youth whose intellectual tendencies were 
the very reverse of my own.            I shall call him Charles Meunier; his real 
surname--an English one, for he was of English extraction--having since 
become celebrated.         He was an orphan, who lived on a miserable pittance 
while he pursued the medical studies for which he had a special genius. 
Strange!   that   with   my   vague   mind,   susceptible   and   unobservant,   hating 
inquiry and given up to contemplation, I should have been drawn towards 
a youth whose strongest passion was science.                 But the bond was not an 
intellectual one; it came from a source that can happily blend the stupid 
with     the   brilliant,  the   dreamy      with   the   practical:     it   came     from 
community  of   feeling.  Charles   was   poor   and  ugly,  derided   by  Genevese 
gamins, and not acceptable in drawing-rooms.                I saw that he was isolated, 
as I was, though from a different cause, and, stimulated by a sympathetic 
resentment, I made timid advances towards him.                 It is enough to say that 
there sprang up as much comradeship between us as our different habits 
would     allow;    and   in  Charles's    rare  holidays    we    went   up   the   Saleve 
together,    or  took    the  boat   to  Vevay,   while    I  listened   dreamily    to  the 
monologues        in   which    he    unfolded     his  bold    conceptions      of   future 
experiment   and   discovery.        I   mingled   them   confusedly   in   my   thought 
with glimpses of blue water and delicate floating cloud, with the notes of 
birds and the distant glitter of the glacier.           He  knew quite  well that   my 
mind was half absent, yet he liked to talk to me in this way; for don't we 
talk of our hopes and our projects even to dogs and birds, when they love 
us?    I have mentioned this one friendship because of its connexion with a 
strange and terrible scene which I shall have to narrate in my subsequent 
life. 
     This   happier   life   at   Geneva   was   put   an   end   to   by   a   severe   illness, 
which      is  partly   a  blank    to   me,   partly    a  time    of  dimly-remembered 
suffering,  with the   presence of   my  father   by  my   bed   from  time   to   time. 
Then   came   the   languid   monotony   of   convalescence,   the   days   gradually 
breaking into variety and distinctness as my strength enabled me to take 
longer   and   longer   drives.      On   one   of   these   more   vividly   remembered 
days, my father said to me, as he sat beside my sofa - 
     "When you are quite well enough to travel, Latimer, I shall take you 
home with me.          The journey will amuse you and do you good, for I shall 
go   through   the   Tyrol   and   Austria,   and   you   will   see   many   new   places. 
Our neighbours, the Filmores, are come; Alfred will join us at Basle, and 
we shall all go together to Vienna, and back by Prague" . . . 
     My father was called away before he had finished his sentence, and he 
left my  mind   resting on the  word PRAGUE,  with a strange sense that   a 
new and wondrous scene was breaking upon me:                       a city under the broad 
sunshine, that seemed to me as if it were the summer sunshine of a long- 
past century arrested in its course--unrefreshed for ages by dews of night, 
or the rushing rain-cloud; scorching the dusty, weary, time-eaten grandeur 
of   a   people   doomed   to   live   on   in   the   stale   repetition   of   memories,   like 
deposed      and    superannuated       kings    in  their   regal   gold-inwoven       tatters. 
The   city   looked   so   thirsty   that   the   broad   river   seemed   to   me   a   sheet   of 
metal; and the blackened statues, as I passed under their blank gaze, along 
the unending bridge, with their ancient garments and their saintly crowns, 
seemed to me the real inhabitants and owners of this place, while the busy, 
trivial men and women, hurrying to and fro, were a swarm of ephemeral 
visitants infesting it   for a day.        It is   such grim,  stony beings   as these,  I 
thought,   who   are   the   fathers   of   ancient   faded   children,   in   those   tanned 
time-fretted dwellings that crowd the steep before me; who pay their court 
in   the   worn     and   crumbling      pomp      of  the   palace    which     stretches    its 
monotonous length on the height; who worship wearily in the stifling air 
of the churches, urged by no fear or hope, but compelled by their doom to 
be ever old and undying, to live on in the rigidity of habit, as they live on 
in   perpetual     midday,     without   the    repose    of   night   or  the   new   birth   of 
morning. 
     A stunning clang of metal suddenly thrilled through me, and I became 
conscious   of   the   objects   in   my   room   again:      one   of   the   fire-   irons   had 
fallen as   Pierre opened the door to   bring   me   my  draught.   My  heart   was 
palpitating violently, and I begged Pierre to leave my draught beside me; I 
would take it presently. 
     As   soon   as   I   was   alone   again,   I   began   to   ask   myself   whether   I   had 
been     sleeping.     Was     this  a   dream--this     wonderfully       distinct   vision-   - 
minute      in  its  distinctness     down     to   a  patch    of   rainbow     light   on   the 
pavement, transmitted through a coloured lamp in the shape of a star--of a 
strange city, quite unfamiliar to my imagination?                 I had seen no picture of 
Prague:      it   lay   in   my   mind   as   a   mere   name,   with   vaguely-remembered 
historical     associations--ill-defined        memories       of  imperial     grandeur     and 
religious wars. 
     Nothing   of   this   sort   had   ever   occurred   in   my   dreaming   experience 
before,   for   I   had   often   been   humiliated   because   my   dreams   were   only 
saved   from   being   utterly   disjointed   and   commonplace   by   the   frequent 
terrors of nightmare.         But I could not believe that I had been asleep, for I 
remembered distinctly the gradual breaking-in of the vision upon me, like 
the  new   images   in   a  dissolving   view,   or   the   growing   distinctness   of   the 
landscape as the sun lifts up the veil of the morning mist.                      And while I 
was   conscious   of   this   incipient   vision,   I   was   also   conscious   that   Pierre 
came to tell my father Mr. Filmore was waiting for him, and that my father 
hurried out of the room.           No, it was not a dream; was it--the thought was 
full of tremulous exultation--was it the poet's nature in me, hitherto only a 
troubled       yearning      sensibility,    now      manifesting       itself   suddenly      as 
spontaneous   creation?          Surely   it   was   in   this   way   that   Homer   saw   the 
plain of Troy, that Dante saw the abodes of the departed, that Milton saw 
the earthward flight of the Tempter.               Was it that my illness had wrought 
some   happy   change   in   my   organization--given   a   firmer   tension   to   my 
nerves--carried       off   some    dull   obstruction?       I  had    often   read   of   such 
effects--in   works   of   fiction   at   least. Nay;   in   genuine   biographies   I   had 
read of the subtilizing or exalting influence of some diseases on the mental 
powers.       Did    not   Novalis     feel   his  inspiration     intensified    under    the 
progress of consumption? 
     When      my   mind    had    dwelt   for  some     time   on  this   blissful  idea,   it 
seemed to me that I might perhaps test it by an exertion of my will.                     The 
vision had begun when my father was speaking of our going to Prague.                         I 
did not for a moment believe it was really a representation of that city; I 
believed--I   hoped   it   was   a   picture   that   my   newly   liberated   genius   had 
painted     in  fiery   haste,   with   the  colours    snatched     from    lazy   memory. 
Suppose I were to fix my mind on some other place--Venice, for example, 
which was far more familiar to my imagination than Prague:                     perhaps the 
same sort of result would follow.            I concentrated my thoughts on Venice; 
I   stimulated   my   imagination   with   poetic   memories,   and   strove   to   feel 
myself   present   in Venice,   as   I   had   felt   myself   present   in   Prague.   But   in 
vain.    I was only colouring the Canaletto engravings that hung in my old 
bedroom   at   home;   the   picture   was   a   shifting   one,   my   mind   wandering 
uncertainly   in   search   of   more   vivid   images;   I   could   see   no   accident   of 
form or shadow without conscious labour after the necessary conditions. 
It was all prosaic effort, not rapt passivity, such as I had experienced half 
an   hour   before.    I   was   discouraged;   but   I   remembered   that   inspiration 
was fitful. 
     For several days I was in a state of excited expectation, watching for a 
recurrence of my new gift.           I sent my thoughts ranging over my world of 
knowledge,   in   the   hope   that   they   would   find   some   object   which   would 
send a reawakening vibration through my slumbering genius.                      But no; my 
world remained as dim as ever, and that flash of strange light refused to 
come again, though I watched for it with palpitating eagerness. 
     My   father   accompanied   me   every   day   in   a   drive,   and   a   gradually 
lengthening walk as my powers of walking increased; and one evening he 
had agreed to come and fetch me at twelve the next day, that we might go 
together to select a musical box, and other purchases rigorously demanded 
of a rich Englishman visiting Geneva.               He was one of the most punctual 
of men and bankers, and I was always nervously anxious to be quite ready 
for him at the appointed time. But, to my surprise, at a quarter past twelve 
he had not appeared. I felt all the impatience of a convalescent who has 
nothing particular to do, and who has just taken a tonic in the prospect of 
immediate exercise that would carry off the stimulus. 
     Unable to sit still and reserve my strength, I walked up and down the 
room,   looking   out   on   the   current   of   the   Rhone,   just   where   it   leaves   the 
dark-blue lake; but thinking all the while of the possible causes that could 
detain my father. 
     Suddenly   I   was   conscious   that   my   father   was   in   the   room,   but   not 
alone:     there    were    two   persons     with   him.    Strange!      I   had   heard    no 
footstep, I had not seen the door open; but I saw my father, and at his right 
hand our neighbour Mrs. Filmore, whom I remembered very well, though 
I had not seen her for five years.             She was a commonplace middle-aged 
woman, in silk and cashmere; but the lady on the left of my father was not 
more than twenty, a tall, slim, willowy figure, with luxuriant blond hair, 
arranged in cunning braids and folds that looked almost too massive for 
the   slight   figure   and   the   small-featured,   thin-lipped   face   they   crowned. 
But   the   face   had   not   a   girlish   expression:   the   features   were   sharp,   the 
pale grey eyes at once acute, restless, and sarcastic.                They were fixed on 
me   in   half-smiling   curiosity,   and   I   felt   a   painful   sensation   as   if   a   sharp 
wind were cutting   me.          The pale-green dress, and the  green leaves   that 
seemed to   form  a   border   about her pale   blond hair,  made   me   think of   a 
Water-Nixie--for my mind was full of German lyrics, and this pale, fatal- 
eyed   woman,   with   the green   weeds,   looked   like   a   birth   from  some   cold 
sedgy stream, the daughter of an aged river. 
     "Well, Latimer, you thought me long," my father said . . . 
     But while the last word was in my ears, the whole group vanished, and 
there was nothing between me and the Chinese printed folding- screen that 
stood   before   the   door.     I   was   cold   and   trembling;   I   could   only   totter 
forward   and   throw   myself   on   the   sofa.        This   strange   new   power   had 
manifested itself again . . . But WAS it a power?                 Might it not rather be a 
disease--a sort of intermittent delirium, concentrating my energy of brain 
into   moments   of   unhealthy   activity,   and   leaving   my   saner   hours   all   the 
more barren? I felt a dizzy sense of unreality in what my eye rested on; I 
grasped      the   bell   convulsively,      like  one    trying    to  free   himself     from 
nightmare,   and   rang   it   twice.     Pierre   came   with   a   look   of   alarm   in   his 
face. 
     "Monsieur ne se trouve pas bien?" he said anxiously. 
     "I'm tired of waiting, Pierre," I said, as distinctly and emphatically as I 
could,   like   a   man   determined   to   be   sober   in   spite   of   wine;   "I'm   afraid 
something has happened to my father--he's usually so punctual.                         Run to 
the Hotel des Bergues and see if he is there." 
     Pierre left the room at once, with a soothing "Bien, Monsieur"; and I 
felt   the   better   for   this   scene   of   simple,   waking   prose. Seeking   to   calm 
myself   still   further,   I   went   into   my   bedroom,   adjoining   the   salon,   and 
opened   a   case   of   eau-de-Cologne;   took   out   a   bottle;   went   through   the 
process of taking   out the  cork very neatly,  and then   rubbed the  reviving 
spirit over my hands and forehead, and under my nostrils, drawing a new 
delight from the scent because I had procured it by slow details of labour, 
and     by   no   strange    sudden     madness.      Already      I  had    begun     to  taste 
something of the horror that belongs to   the lot of a human being   whose 
nature is not adjusted to simple human conditions. 
     Still   enjoying     the   scent,   I  returned     to  the   salon,   but   it  was    not 
unoccupied,       as   it  had  been    before    I  left  it. In    front   of  the   Chinese 
folding-screen there was my father, with Mrs. Filmore on his right hand, 
and on his left--the slim, blond-haired girl, with the keen face and the keen 
eyes fixed on me in half-smiling curiosity. 
     "Well, Latimer, you thought me long," my father said . . . 
     I heard no more, felt no more, till I became conscious that I was lying 
with my head low on the sofa, Pierre, and my father by my side.                      As soon 
as    I  was   thoroughly      revived,    my    father   left  the   room,    and   presently 
returned, saying - 
     "I've been to tell the ladies how you are, Latimer.                They were waiting 
in the next room.        We shall put off our shopping expedition to-day." 
     Presently   he   said,   "That   young   lady   is   Bertha   Grant,   Mrs.   Filmore's 
orphan niece.        Filmore has adopted her, and she lives with them, so you 
will   have   her   for   a   neighbour   when   we   go   home--perhaps   for   a   near 
relation; for there is a tenderness between her and Alfred, I suspect, and I 
should be gratified by the match, since Filmore means to provide for her in 
every way as if she were his daughter. It had not occurred to me that you 
knew nothing about her living with the Filmores." 
     He   made   no   further   allusion   to   the   fact   of   my   having   fainted   at   the 
moment   of seeing   her,  and   I   would   not   for   the   world have   told him  the 
reason:     I shrank   from the   idea of   disclosing to any  one what   might   be 
regarded as a pitiable peculiarity, most of all from betraying it to my father, 
who would have suspected my sanity ever after. 
     I   do   not  mean     to  dwell    with    particularity    on   the  details   of   my 
experience.       I have described these two cases at length, because they had 
definite, clearly traceable results in my after-lot. 
     Shortly after this last occurrence--I think the very next day--I began to 
be aware of a phase in my abnormal sensibility, to which, from the languid 
and slight nature of my intercourse with others since my illness, I had not 
been   alive   before.     This   was   the   obtrusion   on   my   mind   of   the   mental 
process going forward in first one person, and then another, with whom I 
happened to be in contact:           the vagrant, frivolous ideas and emotions of 
some uninteresting acquaintance--Mrs. Filmore, for example--would force 
themselves   on   my   consciousness   like   an   importunate,   ill-played   musical 
instrument,      or   the   loud    activity   of   an   imprisoned      insect.   But    this 
unpleasant   sensibility  was   fitful,   and left   me   moments   of  rest,   when   the 
souls of my companions were once more shut out from  me, and I felt   a 
relief such as silence brings to wearied nerves. I might have believed this 
importunate insight to be merely a diseased activity of the imagination, but 
that   my  prevision   of   incalculable   words   and   actions   proved   it   to   have   a 
fixed relation to the mental process in other minds.                But this superadded 
consciousness,  wearying and   annoying   enough   when   it   urged   on   me   the 
trivial experience of indifferent people, became an intense pain and grief 
when it seemed to be opening to me the souls of those who were in a close 
relation to me--when the rational talk, the graceful attentions, the wittily- 
turned phrases, and the kindly deeds, which used to make the web of their 
characters,   were   seen   as   if   thrust   asunder   by   a   microscopic   vision,   that 
showed all the intermediate frivolities, all the suppressed egoism, all the 
struggling chaos of puerilities, meanness, vague capricious memories, and 
indolent make-shift thoughts, from which human words and deeds emerge 
like leaflets covering a fermenting heap. 
     At Basle we were joined by my brother Alfred, now a handsome, self- 
confident      man    of  six-and-twenty--a       thorough     contrast    to  my    fragile, 
nervous,   ineffectual   self.     I   believe   I   was   held   to   have   a   sort   of   half- 
womanish, half-ghostly beauty; for the portrait-painters, who are thick as 
weeds at Geneva, had often asked me to sit to them, and I had been the 
model of a dying minstrel in a fancy picture. But I thoroughly disliked my 
own physique and nothing but the belief that it was a condition of poetic 
genius would have reconciled me to it.               That brief hope was quite fled, 
and I saw in my face now nothing but the stamp of a morbid organization, 
framed     for   passive   suffering--too     feeble   for   the  sublime    resistance    of 
poetic    production.      Alfred,    from    whom     I  had   been   almost    constantly 
separated, and who, in his present stage of character and appearance, came 
before me as a perfect stranger, was bent on being extremely friendly and 
brother-like to me.       He had the superficial kindness of a good-humoured, 
self-satisfied     nature,    that  fears    no   rivalry,   and   has    encountered      no 
contrarieties.     I am not sure that my disposition was good enough for me 
to have been quite free from envy towards him, even if our desires had not 
clashed, and if I had been in the healthy human condition which admits of 
generous      confidence     and   charitable    construction.      There     must   always 
have been an antipathy between our natures.                 As it was, he became in a 
few   weeks   an   object   of   intense   hatred   to   me;   and   when   he   entered   the 
room, still more when he spoke, it was as if a sensation of grating metal 
had    set   my    teeth   on   edge.    My      diseased    consciousness       was   more 
intensely and continually  occupied with his   thoughts and emotions,  than 
with   those   of   any  other   person   who   came   in   my   way.  I   was   perpetually 
exasperated      with   the   petty   promptings     of  his   conceit   and   his  love   of 
patronage,   with   his   self-complacent   belief   in   Bertha   Grant's   passion   for 
him,    with   his   half-pitying    contempt     for  me--seen     not   in  the  ordinary 
indications of intonation and phrase and slight action, which an acute and 
suspicious      mind    is  on  the   watch    for,  but   in  all  their  naked    skinless 
complication. 
     For we were rivals, and our desires clashed, though he was not aware 
of it.   I have said nothing yet of the effect Bertha Grant produced in me 
on a nearer acquaintance.          That effect was chiefly determined by the fact 
that she made the only exception, among all the human beings about me, 
to my unhappy gift of insight.            About Bertha I was always in a state of 
uncertainty:      I could watch the expression of her face, and speculate on 
its meaning; I could ask for her opinion with the real interest of ignorance; 
I could listen for her words and watch for her smile with hope and fear: 
she had for me the fascination of an unravelled destiny.                  I say it was this 
fact that chiefly determined the strong effect she produced on me: for, in 
the abstract, no womanly character could seem to have less affinity for that 
of a shrinking, romantic, passionate youth than Bertha's.                  She was keen, 
sarcastic,     unimaginative,       prematurely      cynical,    remaining      critical  and 
unmoved        in  the   most    impressive     scenes,    inclined    to  dissect    all  my 
favourite   poems,   and   especially   contemptous   towards   the   German   lyrics 
which were my pet literature at that time.             To this moment I am unable to 
define my feeling towards her:            it was not ordinary boyish admiration, for 
she   was   the   very   opposite,   even   to   the   colour   of   her   hair,   of   the   ideal 
woman   who   still   remained   to   me   the   type   of   loveliness;   and   she   was 
without that enthusiasm for the great and good, which, even at the moment 
of   her   strongest   dominion      over   me,   I   should   have   declared   to   be   the 
highest element of character.          But there is no tyranny more complete than 
that    which    a  self-centred     negative     nature   exercises     over   a  morbidly 
sensitive   nature   perpetually   craving   sympathy   and   support.            The   most 
independent people feel the effect of a man's silence in heightening their 
value     for  his   opinion--feel     an   additional     triumph     in  conquering      the 
reverence of   a critic  habitually captious   and satirical:           no   wonder,  then, 
that an enthusiastic self-distrusting youth should watch and wait before the 
closed secret   of   a sarcastic   woman's   face,   as if it   were the   shrine   of   the 
doubtfully benignant deity who ruled his destiny. For a young enthusiast is 
unable   to   imagine   the   total   negation   in   another   mind   of   the   emotions 
which are stirring his own:          they may be feeble, latent, inactive, he thinks, 
but   they  are   there--they   may   be   called   forth;   sometimes,   in   moments   of 
happy     hallucination,     he   believes   they   may    be   there   in  all  the  greater 
strength because he sees no outward sign of them.                   And this effect, as I 
have   intimated,   was   heightened   to   its   utmost   intensity   in   me,   because 
Bertha     was    the   only   being    who     remained      for  me    in  the   mysterious 
seclusion of soul that renders such youthful delusion possible. Doubtless 
there     was    another    sort   of   fascination     at   work--that     subtle    physical 
attraction which delights in cheating our psychological predictions, and in 
compelling the men who paint sylphs, to fall in love with some bonne et 
brave femme, heavy- heeled and freckled. 
     Bertha's     behaviour      towards    me    was    such   as   to  encourage      all  my 
illusions,   to   heighten   my   boyish   passion,   and   make   me   more   and   more 
dependent       on   her   smiles.     Looking       back    with   my    present    wretched 
knowledge, I conclude that her vanity and love   of power were   intensely 
gratified by the belief that I had fainted on first seeing her purely from the 
strong   impression   her   person   had   produced   on   me.           The   most   prosaic 
woman   likes   to   believe   herself   the   object   of   a   violent,   a   poetic   passion; 
and without a grain   of romance in   her, Bertha had that spirit of   intrigue 
which gave piquancy to the idea that the brother of the man she meant to 
marry was dying with love and jealousy for her sake.                     That she meant to 
marry my brother, was what at that time I did not believe; for though he 
was assiduous in his attentions to her, and I knew well enough that both he 
and my father had made up their minds to this result, there was not yet an 
understood       engagement--there         had    been    no   explicit    declaration;     and 
Bertha   habitually,   while   she   flirted   with   my   brother,   and   accepted   his 
homage       in  a  way    that   implied     to  him   a   thorough     recognition     of   its 
intention,   made   me   believe,   by   the   subtlest   looks   and   phrases--feminine 
nothings which could never be quoted against her--that he was really the 
object   of   her  secret   ridicule;   that   she  thought   him,   as   I   did,   a   coxcomb, 
whom she would have pleasure in disappointing.                     Me she openly petted 
in   my   brother's   presence,   as   if   I   were   too   young   and   sickly   ever   to   be 
thought of as a lover; and that was the view he took of me.                    But I believe 
she must inwardly have delighted in the tremors into which she threw me 
by the coaxing way in which she patted my curls, while she laughed at my 
quotations.       Such     caresses    were    always    given    in  the  presence     of   our 
friends;   for   when   we   were   alone   together,   she   affected   a   much   greater 
distance towards me, and now and then took the opportunity, by words or 
slight actions, to stimulate my foolish timid hope that she really preferred 
me.     And   why  should   she   not   follow   her   inclination?        I   was   not   in   so 
advantageous a position as my brother, but I had fortune, I was not a year 
younger than she was, and she was an heiress, who would soon be of age 
to decide for herself. 
     The fluctuations of hope and fear, confined to this one channel, made 
each day in her presence a delicious torment.                  There was one deliberate 
act   of   hers   which   especially   helped   to   intoxicate   me.   When   we   were   at 
Vienna   her   twentieth   birthday   occurred,   and   as   she   was   very   fond   of 
ornaments, we all took the opportunity of the splendid jewellers' shops in 
that Teutonic Paris to purchase her a birthday present of jewellery.                    Mine, 
naturally,   was   the least   expensive; it   was   an opal   ring--the  opal   was   my 
favourite stone, because it seems to blush and turn pale as if it had a soul. 
I told Bertha so when I gave it her, and said that it was an emblem of the 
poetic nature, changing with the changing light of heaven and of woman's 
eyes.      In   the   evening     she   appeared      elegantly     dressed,    and    wearing 
conspicuously all the birthday presents except mine.                   I looked eagerly at 
her fingers, but saw no opal.           I had no opportunity of noticing this to her 
during   the   evening;   but   the   next   day,   when   I   found   her   seated   near   the 
window alone, after breakfast, I said, "You scorn to wear my poor opal.                        I 
should   have   remembered   that   you   despised   poetic   natures,   and   should 
have   given   you   coral,   or   turquoise,   or   some   other   opaque   unresponsive 
stone."   "Do   I   despise   it?"   she   answered,   taking   hold   of   a   delicate   gold 
chain   which   she   always   wore   round   her   neck   and   drawing   out   the   end 
from her bosom with my ring hanging to it; "it hurts me a little, I can tell 
you,"   she   said,   with   her   usual   dubious   smile,   "to   wear   it   in   that   secret 
place; and since your poetical nature is so stupid as to prefer a more public 
position, I shall not endure the pain any longer." 
     She took off the ring from the chain and put it on her finger, smiling 
still, while the blood rushed to my cheeks, and I could not trust myself to 
say a word of entreaty that she would keep the ring where it was before. 
     I was completely fooled by this, and for two days shut myself up in my 
own   room   whenever   Bertha   was   absent,   that   I   might   intoxicate   myself 
afresh with the thought of this scene and all it implied. 
I should mention that during these two months--which seemed a long 
life   to   me   from   the   novelty   and   intensity   of   the   pleasures   and   pains   I 
underwent--my         diseased    anticipation     in  other    people's    consciousness 
continued to torment me; now it was my father, and now my brother, now 
Mrs. Filmore or her husband, and now our German courier, whose stream 
of thought rushed upon me like a ringing in the ears not to be got rid of, 
though      it  allowed     my    own    impulses      and   ideas    to  continue     their 
uninterrupted   course.       It   was   like   a   preternaturally   heightened   sense   of 
hearing, making audible to one a roar of sound where others find perfect 
stillness.    The   weariness   and   disgust   of   this   involuntary   intrusion   into 
other   souls   was   counteracted   only   by   my   ignorance   of   Bertha,   and   my 
growing passion for her; a passion enormously stimulated, if not produced, 
by that ignorance.        She was my oasis of mystery in the dreary desert of 
knowledge.       I had never allowed my diseased condition to betray itself, 
or to drive me into any unusual speech or action, except once, when, in a 
moment of peculiar bitterness against my brother, I had forestalled some 
words which I knew he was going to utter--a clever observation, which he 
had    prepared     beforehand.       He     had   occasionally     a   slightly   affected 
hesitation in his speech, and when he paused an instant after the second 
word, my impatience and jealousy impelled me to continue the speech for 
him, as if it were something we had both learned by rote.                   He coloured 
and looked astonished, as well as annoyed; and the words had no sooner 
escaped my lips than I felt a shock of alarm lest such an anticipation of 
words--very far from being words of course, easy to divine--should have 
betrayed   me   as   an   exceptional   being,   a   sort   of   quiet   energumen,   whom 
every     one,   Bertha    above    all,  would     shudder     at  and   avoid.     But    I 
magnified,      as  usual,   the  impression     any   word    or  deed   of  mine    could 
produce      on  others;   for   no  one    gave   any   sign   of  having    noticed    my 
interruption as more than a rudeness, to be forgiven me on the score of my 
feeble nervous condition. 
     While this superadded consciousness of the actual was almost constant 
with me, I   had never   had a   recurrence of that distinct   prevision which   I 
have   described   in   relation   to   my   first   interview   with   Bertha;   and   I   was 
waiting with eager curiosity to know whether or not my vision of Prague 
would prove to have been an instance of the same kind.                    A few days after 
the incident of the opal ring, we were paying one of our frequent visits to 
the Lichtenberg Palace. I could never look at many pictures in succession; 
for pictures, when they are at all powerful, affect me so strongly that one 
or two exhaust all my capability of contemplation.                    This morning I had 
been looking at Giorgione's picture of the cruel-eyed woman, said to be a 
likeness of Lucrezia Borgia.            I had stood long alone before it, fascinated 
by the terrible reality of that cunning, relentless face, till I felt a strange 
poisoned sensation, as if I had long been inhaling a fatal odour, and was 
just beginning to be conscious of its effects.              Perhaps even then I should 
not have moved away, if the rest of the party had not returned to this room, 
and announced that they were going to the Belvedere Gallery to settle a 
bet which had arisen between my brother and Mr. Filmore about a portrait. 
I followed them dreamily, and was hardly alive to what occurred till they 
had   all   gone   up   to   the   gallery,   leaving   me   below;   for   I   refused   to   come 
within   sight   of   another   picture   that   day.   I   made   my   way   to   the   Grand 
Terrace, since it was agreed that we should saunter in the gardens when 
the   dispute   had   been   decided.       I   had   been   sitting   here   a   short   space, 
vaguely   conscious   of   trim   gardens,   with        a   city   and  green   hills   in  the 
distance, when, wishing to avoid the proximity of the sentinel, I rose and 
walked down the broad stone steps, intending to seat myself farther on in 
the gardens. Just as I reached the gravel-walk, I felt an arm slipped within 
mine, and   a light   hand gently  pressing my  wrist.              In the   same instant   a 
strange   intoxicating   numbness   passed   over   me,   like   the   continuance   or 
climax of the sensation I was still feeling from the gaze of Lucrezia Borgia. 
The   gardens,   the   summer   sky,   the   consciousness   of   Bertha's   arm   being 
within mine, all vanished, and I seemed to be suddenly in darkness, out of 
which there gradually broke a dim firelight, and I felt myself sitting in my 
father's   leather   chair   in   the   library   at   home.  I   knew   the   fireplace--the 
dogs   for   the   wood-fire--the   black   marble   chimney-piece   with   the   white 
marble      medallion     of   the   dying    Cleopatra     in  the   centre.    Intense    and 
hopeless misery was pressing on my soul; the light became stronger, for 
Bertha   was   entering   with   a   candle   in   her   hand-   -Bertha,   my   wife--with 
cruel   eyes,   with   green   jewels   and   green   leaves   on   her   white   ball-dress; 
every hateful thought within her present to me . . . "Madman, idiot! why 
don't you kill yourself, then?"          It was a moment of hell.          I saw into her 
pitiless   soul--saw   its   barren   worldliness,   its   scorching   hate--and   felt   it 
clothe me round like an air I was obliged to breathe.                 She came with her 
candle and stood over me with a bitter smile of contempt; I saw the great 
emerald brooch on her bosom, a studded   serpent with diamond   eyes.                       I 
shuddered--I despised this woman with the barren soul and mean thoughts; 
but   I   felt   helpless   before   her,   as   if   she   clutched   my   bleeding   heart,   and 
would clutch it till the last drop of life- blood ebbed away.                 She was my 
wife, and we hated each other. Gradually the hearth, the dim library, the 
candle-light disappeared--seemed to melt away into a background of light, 
the green serpent with the diamond eyes remaining a dark image on the 
retina.    Then     I  had   a  sense    of  my   eyelids    quivering,    and   the   living 
daylight broke in upon me; I saw gardens, and heard voices; I was seated 
on the steps of the Belvedere Terrace, and my friends were round me. 
     The   tumult   of   mind   into   which   I   was   thrown   by   this   hideous   vision 
made     me    ill  for  several   days,   and   prolonged      our  stay   at  Vienna.     I 
shuddered       with   horror    as  the   scene   recurred    to   me;   and   it  recurred 
constantly, with all its minutiae, as if they had been burnt into my memory; 
and yet, such is the madness of the human heart under the influence of its 
immediate desires, I felt a wild hell-braving joy that Bertha was to be mine; 
for the fulfilment of my former prevision concerning her first appearance 
before me, left me little hope that this last hideous glimpse of the future 
was   the   mere   diseased   play   of   my   own   mind,   and   had   no   relation   to 
external realities.      One thing alone I looked towards as a possible means 
of casting doubt on my terrible conviction--the discovery that my vision of 
Prague had been false--and Prague was the next city on our route. 
     Meanwhile,   I   was   no   sooner   in   Bertha's   society   again   than   I   was   as 
completely   under   her   sway   as   before.      What   if   I   saw   into   the   heart   of 
Bertha, the matured woman--Bertha, my wife?                   Bertha, the GIRL, was a 
fascinating     secret   to  me   still:  I   trembled    under    her   touch;   I  felt  the 
witchery of her presence; I yearned to be assured of her love.                 The fear of 
poison is feeble against the sense of thirst. Nay, I was just as jealous of my 
brother as before--just as much irritated by his small patronizing ways; for 
my pride, my diseased sensibility, were there as they had always been, and 
winced      as   inevitably   under   every   offence   as     my   eye    winced   from   an 
intruding   mote.       The   future,   even   when   brought   within   the   compass   of 
feeling by a vision that made me shudder, had still no more than the force 
of   an   idea,   compared   with   the   force   of   present   emotion--of   my   love   for 
Bertha, of my dislike and jealousy towards my brother. 
     It is an old story, that men sell themselves to the tempter, and sign a 
bond   with   their  blood,   because   it   is   only  to   take   effect   at   a   distant   day; 
then rush on to snatch the cup their souls thirst after with an impulse not 
the less savage because there is a dark shadow beside them for evermore. 
There   is    no   short   cut,  no   patent   tram-road,     to  wisdom:       after   all  the 
centuries of invention,  the soul's   path lies through the thorny  wilderness 
which must be still trodden in solitude, with bleeding feet, with sobs for 
help, as it was trodden by them of old time. 
     My mind speculated eagerly on the means by which I should become 
my brother's successful rival, for I was still too timid, in my ignorance of 
Bertha's actual feeling, to venture on any step that would urge from her an 
avowal   of   it.    I   thought   I   should   gain   confidence   even   for   this,   if   my 
vision of Prague proved to have been veracious; and yet, the horror of that 
certitude!      Behind the slim girl Bertha, whose words and looks I watched 
for,   whose   touch   was   bliss,   there   stood   continually   that   Bertha   with   the 
fuller form, the harder eyes, the more rigid mouth--with the barren, selfish 
soul laid bare; no longer a fascinating secret, but a measured fact, urging 
itself perpetually on my unwilling sight. Are you unable to give me your 
sympathy--you   who   react   this?         Are   you   unable   to   imagine   this   double 
consciousness   at   work   within   me,   flowing   on   like   two   parallel   streams 
which never mingle their waters and blend into a common hue?                          Yet you 
must   have   known   something   of   the   presentiments   that   spring   from   an 
insight at war with passion; and my visions were only like presentiments 
intensified to horror.        You have known the powerlessness of ideas before 
the   might   of   impulse;   and   my   visions,   when   once   they   had   passed   into 
memory, were mere ideas--pale shadows that beckoned in vain, while my 
hand was grasped by the living and the loved. 
     In    after-days    I  thought     with    bitter  regret    that   if  I  had   foreseen 
something more or something different--if   instead of that hideous vision 
which poisoned the passion it could not destroy, or if even along with it I 
could   have   had   a   foreshadowing   of   that   moment   when   I   looked   on   my 
brother's face for the last time, some softening influence would have been 
shed over my feeling towards him:               pride and hatred would surely have 
been   subdued   into   pity,   and   the   record   of   those   hidden   sins   would   have 
been shortened.        But this is one of the vain thoughts with which we men 
flatter ourselves.      We try to believe that the egoism within us would have 
easily been melted, and that it was only the narrowness of our knowledge 
which hemmed in our generosity, our awe, our human piety, and hindered 
them     from    submerging       our   hard   indifference     to   the   sensations    and 
emotions      of  our   fellows.    Our     tenderness     and   self-renunciation      seem 
strong when our egoism has had its day--when, after our mean striving for 
a triumph that is to be another's loss, the triumph comes suddenly, and we 
shudder at it, because it is held out by the chill hand of death. 
     Our arrival in Prague happened at night, and I was glad of this, for it 
seemed like a deferring of a terribly decisive moment, to be in the city for 
hours without seeing it.        As we were not to remain long in Prague, but to 
go on speedily to Dresden, it was proposed that we should drive out the 
next morning and take a general view of the place, as well as visit some of 
its specially interesting spots, before the heat became oppressive--for we 
were in August, and the season was hot and dry.                But it happened that the 
ladies were rather late at their morning toilet, and to my father's politely- 
repressed but perceptible annoyance, we were not in the carriage till the 
morning was far advanced.            I thought with a sense of relief, as we entered 
the   Jews'   quarter,   where   we   were   to   visit   the   old   synagogue,   that   we 
should be kept in this flat, shut-up part of the city, until we should all be 
too   tired   and   too   warm   to   go   farther,   and   so   we   should   return   without 
seeing more than the streets through which we had already passed.                      That 
would give me another day's suspense--suspense, the only form in which a 
fearful    spirit  knows     the   solace   of  hope.     But,    as  I  stood   under    the 
blackened,  groined   arches of   that   old synagogue,  made   dimly  visible   by 
the   seven   thin   candles   in   the   sacred   lamp,   while   our   Jewish    cicerone 
reached down the Book of the Law, and read to us in its ancient tongue--I 
felt a shuddering impression that this strange building, with its shrunken 
lights,   this   surviving   withered   remnant   of   medieval   Judaism,   was   of   a 
piece with my vision.          Those darkened dusty Christian saints, with their 
loftier arches and their larger candles, needed the consolatory scorn with 
which they might point to a more shrivelled death-in-life than their own. 
     As I expected, when we left the Jews' quarter the elders of our party 
wished to return to the hotel.           But now, instead of rejoicing in this, as I 
had   done   beforehand,   I   felt   a   sudden   overpowering   impulse   to   go   on   at 
once to the bridge, and put an end to the suspense I had been wishing to 
protract.     I   declared,   with   unusual   decision,   that   I   would   get   out   of   the 
carriage   and   walk   on   alone;   they   might   return   without   me.     My   father, 
thinking this merely a sample of my usual "poetic nonsense," objected that 
I should only do myself harm by walking in the heat; but when I persisted, 
he    said  angrily   that   I  might   follow    my    own    absurd    devices,    but  that 
Schmidt   (our   courier)   must   go   with   me.      I   assented   to   this,   and   set   off 
with Schmidt towards the bridge.             I had no sooner passed from under the 
archway of the grand old gate leading an to the bridge, than a trembling 
seized me, and I turned cold under the mid-day sun; yet I went on; I was in 
search     of  something--a      small   detail   which    I  remembered       with   special 
intensity as part of my vision. There it was--the patch of rainbow light on 
the pavement transmitted through a lamp in the shape of a star. 
Before   the   autumn   was   at   an   end,   and   while   the   brown   leaves   still 
stood   thick     on  the   beeches    in  our   park,   my   brother   and    Bertha    were 
engaged to   each   other,   and it   was   understood   that   their  marriage  was   to 
take   place   early   in   the   next   spring. In   spite   of   the   certainty   I   had   felt 
from that moment on the bridge at Prague, that Bertha would one day be 
my wife, my constitutional timidity and distrust had continued to benumb 
me, and the words in which I had sometimes premeditated a confession of 
my love, had died away unuttered.              The same conflict had gone on within 
me as before--the longing for an assurance of love from Bertha's lips, the 
dread   lest   a   word   of   contempt   and   denial   should   fall   upon   me   like   a 
corrosive acid.       What was the conviction of a distant necessity to me?                  l 
trembled   under   a   present   glance,   I   hungered   after   a   present   joy,   I   was 
clogged   and   chilled   by   a   present   fear.   And   so   the   days   passed   on:    I 
witnessed   Bertha's   engagement   and   heard   her   marriage   discussed   as   if   I 
were   under   a   conscious   nightmare--knowing   it   was   a   dream   that   would 
vanish, but feeling stifled under the grasp of hard-clutching fingers. 
     When I was not in Bertha's presence--and I was with her very often, 
for   she   continued   to   treat   me   with   a   playful   patronage   that   wakened   no 
jealousy in my brother--I spent my time chiefly in wandering, in strolling, 
or taking long rides while the daylight lasted, and then shutting myself up 
with   my   unread   books;   for   books   had   lost   the   power   of   chaining   my 
attention.      My      self-consciousness       was    heightened      to   that   pitch   of 
intensity in which our own emotions take the form of a drama which urges 
itself imperatively on our contemplation, and we begin to weep, less under 
the sense of our suffering than at the thought of it.              I felt a sort of pitying 
anguish      over   the   pathos    of  my    own    lot:   the   lot  of   a  being    finely 
organized for pain, but with hardly any fibres that responded to pleasure-- 
to whom the idea of future evil robbed the present of its joy, and for whom 
the idea of future good did not still the uneasiness of a present yearning or 
a present dread.       I went dumbly through that stage of the poet's suffering, 
in which he feels the delicious pang of utterance, and makes an image of 
his sorrows. 
     I   was   left  entirely    without    remonstrance       concerning     this   dreamy 
wayward   life:      I   knew   my   father's   thought   about   me:     "That   lad   will 
never     be  good    for   anything    in  life:   he   may    waste    his  years    in  an 
insignificant   way   on   the   income   that   falls   to   him:   I   shall   not   trouble 
myself about a career for him." 
     One mild morning   in the beginning   of November, it happened that  I 
was standing outside the portico patting lazy old Caesar, a Newfoundland 
almost blind with age, the only dog that ever took any notice of me--for 
the very dogs shunned me, and fawned on the happier people about me-- 
when the groom brought up my brother's horse which was to carry him to 
the   hunt,   and   my   brother   himself   appeared   at   the   door,   florid,   broad- 
chested, and self-complacent, feeling what a good-natured fellow he was 
not to behave insolently to us all on the strength of his great advantages. 
     "Latimer, old boy," he said to me in a tone of compassionate cordiality, 
"what   a   pity   it   is   you   don't   have   a   run   with   the   hounds   now   and   then! 
The finest thing in the world for low spirits!" 
     "Low spirits!" I thought bitterly, as he rode away; "that is the sort of 
phrase   with   which   coarse,   narrow   natures   like   yours   think   to   describe 
experience of which you can know no more than your horse knows.                         It is 
to such as you that the good of this world falls:                ready dulness, healthy 
selfishness, good-tempered conceit-- these are the keys to happiness." 
     The quick thought came,  that my selfishness  was even stronger than 
his--it was only a suffering selfishness instead of an enjoying one.                    But 
then,   again,   my   exasperating   insight   into Alfred's   self-   complacent   soul, 
his freedom from  all the doubts   and fears, the   unsatisfied yearnings, the 
exquisite   tortures   of   sensitiveness,   that   had   made   the   web   of   my   life, 
seemed to absolve me from all bonds towards him.                   This man needed no 
pity, no love; those fine influences would have been as little felt by him as 
the delicate white mist is felt by the rock it caresses.              There was no evil 
in store for HIM:        if he was not to marry Bertha, it would be because he 
had found a lot pleasanter to himself. 
     Mr.   Filmore's   house   lay   not   more   than   half   a   mile   beyond   our   own 
gates, and whenever I knew my brother was gone in another direction, I 
went there for the chance of finding Bertha at home. Later on in the day I 
walked thither.      By a rare accident she was alone, and we walked out in 
the grounds together, for she seldom went on foot beyond the trimly-swept 
gravel-walks.       I remember what a beautiful sylph she looked to me as the 
low November sun shone on her blond hair, and she tripped along teasing 
me    with   her   usual   light  banter,   to  which    I  listened   half  fondly,   half 
moodily; it was all the sign Bertha's mysterious inner self ever made to me. 
To- day perhaps, the moodiness predominated, for I had not yet shaken off 
the   access   of   jealous   hate   which   my   brother   had   raised   in   me   by   his 
parting   patronage.      Suddenly   I   interrupted   and   startled   her   by   saying, 
almost fiercely, "Bertha, how can you love Alfred?" 
     She looked at me with surprise for a moment, but soon her light smile 
came again, and she answered sarcastically, "Why do you suppose I love 
him?" 
     "How can you ask that, Bertha?" 
     "What! your wisdom thinks I must love the man I'm going to marry? 
The   most   unpleasant   thing   in   the   world.    I   should   quarrel   with   him;   I 
should be jealous of him; our menage would be conducted in a very ill- 
bred manner.       A little quiet contempt contributes greatly to the elegance 
of life." 
     "Bertha, that is not your real feeling.        Why do you delight in trying to 
deceive me by inventing such cynical speeches?" 
     "I need never take the trouble of invention in order to deceive you, my 
small Tasso"-- (that was the mocking name she usually gave me).                      "The 
easiest way to deceive a poet is to tell him the truth." 
     She was testing the validity of her epigram in a daring way, and for a 
moment the shadow of my vision--the Bertha whose soul was no secret to 
me--passed   between   me        and   the  radiant   girl,   the  playful   sylph  whose 
feelings were a fascinating mystery.           I suppose I must have shuddered, or 
betrayed in some other way my momentary chill of horror. 
     "Tasso!" she said, seizing my wrist, and peeping round into my face, 
"are you really beginning to discern what a heartless girl I am?               Why, you 
are   not   half   the   poet   I   thought   you   were;   you   are   actually   capable   of 
believing the truth about me." 
The   shadow   passed   from   between   us,   and   was   no   longer   the   object 
nearest   to   me.     The   girl   whose   light   fingers   grasped   me,   whose   elfish 
charming face looked into mine--who, I thought, was betraying an interest 
in   my    feelings    that   she   would    not   have    directly   avowed,--this       warm 
breathing      presence     again   possessed     my    senses    and   imagination      like  a 
returning siren melody which had been overpowered for an instant by the 
roar   of   threatening   waves.      It   was   a   moment   as   delicious   to   me   as   the 
waking   up   to   a   consciousness   of   youth   after   a  dream   of   middle   age.      I 
forgot everything but my passion, and said with swimming eyes - 
     "Bertha,   shall   you   love   me   when   we   are   first   married?      I   wouldn't 
mind if you really loved me only for a little while." 
     Her   look   of   astonishment,   as   she   loosed   my   hand   and   started   away 
from me, recalled me to a sense of my strange, my criminal indiscretion. 
     "Forgive me," I said, hurriedly, as soon as I could speak again; "I did 
not know what I was saying." 
     "Ah, Tasso's mad fit has come on, I see," she answered quietly, for she 
had recovered herself sooner than I had.               "Let him go home and keep his 
head cool.      I must go in, for the sun is setting." 
     I   left   her--full   of   indignation   against   myself.     I   had   let   slip   words 
which,   if   she   reflected   on   them,   might   rouse   in   her   a   suspicion   of   my 
abnormal   mental   condition--a   suspicion   which   of   all   things   I   dreaded. 
And besides that, I was ashamed of the apparent baseness I had committed 
in uttering them to my brother's betrothed wife.                I wandered home slowly, 
entering our park through a private gate instead of by the lodges.                        As I 
approached   the   house,   I   saw   a   man   dashing   off   at   full   speed   from   the 
stable-yard   across   the   park.   Had   any   accident   happened   at   home?          No; 
perhaps it was only  one of my father's peremptory business errands that 
required this headlong haste. 
     Nevertheless   I   quickened   my   pace   without   any   distinct   motive,   and 
was soon at the house.          I will not dwell on the scene I found there.               My 
brother was dead--had been pitched from his horse, and killed on the spot 
by a concussion of the brain. 
     I went up to the room where he lay, and where my father was seated 
beside him with a look of rigid despair.                I had shunned my father more 
than any one since our return home, for the radical antipathy between our 
natures   made   my   insight   into   his   inner   self   a   constant   affliction   to   me. 
But now, as I went up to him, and stood beside him in sad silence, I felt 
the presence of a new element that blended us as we had never been blent 
before.     My     father    had   been    one   of  the   most    successful     men    in  the 
money-getting world:            he had had no sentimental sufferings, no illness. 
The heaviest trouble that had befallen him was the death of his first wife. 
But he married my mother soon after; and I remember he seemed exactly 
the   same,   to   my   keen   childish   observation,   the   week   after   her   death   as 
before.     But   now,   at   last,   a   sorrow   had   come--the   sorrow   of   old   age, 
which   suffers   the   more   from   the   crushing   of   its   pride   and   its   hopes,   in 
proportion as the pride and hope are narrow and prosaic. His son was to 
have been married soon--would probably have stood for the borough at the 
next   election.      That   son's   existence   was   the   best   motive   that   could   be 
alleged   for   making   new   purchases   of   land   every   year   to   round   off   the 
estate.    It is a dreary thing onto live on doing the same things year after 
year,    without     knowing      why     we    do   them.     Perhaps       the   tragedy    of 
disappointed       youth     and   passion     is  less   piteous    than    the   tragedy    of 
disappointed age and worldliness. 
     As I saw into the desolation of my father's heart, I felt a movement of 
deep   pity  towards   him,   which   was   the  beginning   of   a   new   affection--an 
affection that grew and strengthened in spite of the strange bitterness with 
which he regarded me in the first month or two after my brother's death. 
If it had not been for the softening influence of my compassion for him-- 
the first deep compassion I had ever felt--I should have been stung by the 
perception that my father transferred the inheritance of an eldest son to me 
with   a   mortified   sense   that   fate   had   compelled   him   to   the   unwelcome 
course   of   caring   for   me   as   an   important   being.    It   was   only   in   spite   of 
himself that he began to think of me with anxious regard.                    There is hardly 
any   neglected   child   for   whom   death   has   made   vacant   a   more   favoured 
place, who will not understand what I mean. 
     Gradually, however, my new deference to his wishes, the effect of that 
patience which was born of my pity for him, won upon his affection, and 
he    began    to  please    himself    with    the  endeavour      to   make    me    fill  any 
brother's place as fully as my feebler personality would admit.                   I saw that 
the   prospect   which   by   and   by   presented   itself   of   my   becoming   Bertha's 
husband was welcome to him, and he even contemplated in my case what 
he   had   not   intended   in   my   brother's--that   his   son   and   daughter-in-law 
should make one household with him.                 My softened feelings towards my 
father made this the happiest time I had known since childhood;--these last 
months   in   which   I   retained   the   delicious   illusion   of   loving   Bertha,   of 
longing and doubting and hoping that she might love me.                       She behaved 
with    a  certain    new    consciousness      and   distance    towards     me   after   my 
brother's death; and I too was under a double constraint-- that of delicacy 
towards   my   brother's   memory   and   of   anxiety   as   to   the   impression   my 
abrupt words had left on her mind.             But the additional screen this mutual 
reserve   erected   between us   only  brought   me   more   completely  under   her 
power:      no    matter   how     empty    the  adytum,     so   that  the   veil  be   thick 
enough.       So    absolute     is  our   soul's   need    of   something      hidden    and 
uncertain for the maintenance of that doubt and hope and effort which are 
the breath of its life, that if the whole future were laid bare to us beyond 
to-day,   the   interest   of   all   mankind   would   be   bent   on   the   hours   that   lie 
between;   we   should pant   after   the   uncertainties   of   our one   morning   and 
our   one   afternoon;   we   should   rush   fiercely  to   the   Exchange   for   our   last 
possibility of speculation, of success, of disappointment: we should have a 
glut of political prophets foretelling a crisis or a no-crisis within the only 
twenty-four hours left open to prophecy.               Conceive the condition of the 
human mind if all propositions whatsoever were self-evident except one, 
which was to become self-evident at the close of a summer's day, but in 
the meantime might be the subject of question, of hypothesis, of debate. 
Art and philosophy, literature and science, would fasten like bees on that 
one proposition which had the honey of probability in it, and be the more 
eager because their enjoyment would end with sunset.                   Our impulses, our 
spiritual   activities,  no   more   adjust   themselves   to   the  idea   of   their   future 
nullity, than the beating of our heart, or the irritability of our muscles. 
     Bertha, the slim, fair-haired girl, whose present thoughts and emotions 
were an enigma to me amidst the fatiguing obviousness of the other minds 
around   me,   was   as   absorbing   to   me   as   a   single   unknown   to-day--as   a 
single hypothetic proposition to remain problematic till sunset; and all the 
cramped, hemmed-in belief and disbelief, trust and distrust, of my nature, 
welled out in this one narrow channel. 
     And she made me believe that she loved me.                   Without ever quitting 
her tone of BADINAGE and playful superiority, she intoxicated me with 
the sense that I was necessary to her, that she was never at ease, unless I 
was near her, submitting to her playful tyranny.              It costs a woman so little 
effort    to  beset   us  in  this  way!     A   half-   repressed    word,    a  moment's 
unexpected   silence,   even   an   easy   fit   of   petulance   on   our   account,   will 
serve us as hashish for a long while.            Out of the subtlest web of scarcely 
perceptible     signs,   she   set  me   weaving     the   fancy   that  she   had   always 
unconsciously   loved   me   better   than   Alfred,   but   that,   with   the   ignorant 
fluttered sensibility of a young girl, she had been imposed on by the charm 
that lay for her in the distinction of being admired and chosen by a man 
who made so brilliant a figure in the world as my brother. She satirized 
herself in a very graceful way for her vanity and ambition.                   What was it 
to me that I had the light of my wretched provision on the fact that now it 
was   I   who   possessed   at   least   all   but   the   personal   part   of   my   brother's 
advantages?       Our   sweet   illusions   are   half   of   them   conscious   illusions, 
like effects of colour that we know to be made up of tinsel, broken glass, 
and rags. 
     We were married eighteen months after Alfred's death, one cold, clear 
morning in April, when there came hail and sunshine both together; and 
Bertha, in her white silk and pale-green leaves, and the pale hues of her 
hair   and   face,   looked    like  the   spirit  of  the  morning.     My   father     was 
happier   than   he   had   thought   of   being   again:   my   marriage,   he   felt   sure, 
would complete the desirable modification of my character, and make me 
practical and worldly enough to take my place in society among sane men. 
For he delighted in Bertha's tact and acuteness, and felt sure she would be 
mistress of me, and make me what she chose:                   I was only twenty- one, 
and   madly   in   love   with   her.   Poor   father!     He   kept   that   hope   a   little 
while after   our   first   year   of   marriage,   and it   was   not quite   extinct   when 
paralysis came and saved him from utter disappointment. 
     I shall hurry through the rest of my story, not dwelling so much as I 
have   hitherto   done   on   my   inward   experience.            When   people   are   well 
known   to   each   other,   they   talk   rather   of   what   befalls   them   externally, 
leaving their feelings and sentiments to be inferred. 
     We   lived   in   a   round   of   visits   for   some   time   after   our   return   home, 
giving       splendid      dinner-parties,       and    making       a    sensation      in    our 
neighbourhood   by   the         new    lustre   of  our   equipage,      for  my   father    had 
reserved   this   display   of   his   increased   wealth   for   the   period   of   his   son's 
marriage;       and    we     gave     our   acquaintances        liberal    opportunity       for 
remarking   that   it   was   a   pity   I   made   so   poor   a   figure   as   an   heir   and   a 
bridegroom.         The nervous fatigue of this existence, the insincerities and 
platitudes which I had to live through twice over--through my inner and 
outward sense--would have been maddening to me, if I had not had that 
sort   of   intoxicated   callousness   which   came   from   the   delights   of   a   first 
passion.      A  bride   and   bridegroom,   surrounded   by   all   the   appliances   of 
wealth,     hurried    through     the   day    by   the  whirl    of  society,    filling   their 
solitary   moments   with   hastily-snatched   caresses,   are   prepared   for   their 
future     life   together     as   the   novice     is   prepared      for   the   cloister--by 
experiencing its utmost contrast. 
     Through       all   these   crowded       excited    months,      Bertha's    inward     self 
remained shrouded from me, and I still read her thoughts only through the 
language   of   her   lips   and   demeanour:         I   had   still   the   human   interest   of 
wondering whether what I did and said pleased her, of longing to hear a 
word   of   affection,   of   giving   a   delicious   exaggeration   of   meaning   to   her 
smile.      But    I  was    conscious      of  a  growing      difference     in  her   manner 
towards      me;    sometimes      strong    enough     to  be   called    haughty     coldness, 
cutting and chilling me as the hail had done that came across the sunshine 
on   our   marriage   morning;   sometimes   only   perceptible   in   the   dexterous 
avoidance   of   a   tete-a-tete   walk   or   dinner   to   which   I   had   been   looking 
forward.       I   had   been    deeply    pained     by   this--had    even    felt  a   sort  of 
crushing of the heart, from the sense that my brief day of happiness was 
near its setting; but still I remained dependent on Bertha, eager for the last 
rays of a bliss that would soon be gone for ever, hoping and watching for 
some after-glow more beautiful from the impending night. 
     I   remember--how           should     I  not   remember?--the          time    when     that 
dependence       and   hope    utterly   left  me,  when     the  sadness    I  had   felt  in 
Bertha's growing estrangement became a joy that I looked back upon with 
longing as a man might look back on the last pains in a paralysed limb. 
It was just after the close of my father's last illness, which had necessarily 
withdrawn us from society and thrown us more on each other.                      It was the 
evening of father's death.         On that evening the veil which had shrouded 
Bertha's soul from me--had made me find in her alone among my fellow- 
beings the blessed possibility of mystery, and doubt, and expectation--was 
first withdrawn.       Perhaps it was the first day since the beginning of my 
passion for her, in which that passion was completely neutralized by the 
presence of an absorbing feeling of another kind.               I had been watching by 
my     father's  deathbed:      I  had   been    witnessing     the  last  fitful  yearning 
glance his soul had cast back on the spent inheritance of life--the last faint 
consciousness   of   love   he   had   gathered   from   the   pressure   of   my   hand. 
What     are   all  our  personal    loves    when    we   have    been   sharing    in  that 
supreme   agony?        In   the   first   moments   when   we   come   away   from   the 
presence   of   death,   every   other   relation   to   the   living   is   merged,   to   our 
feeling, in the great relation of a common nature and a common destiny. 
     In that state of mind I joined Bertha in her private sitting-room. She 
was seated in a leaning posture on a settee, with her back towards the door; 
the   great   rich   coils   of   her   pale   blond   hair   surmounting   her   small   neck, 
visible   above   the   back   of   the   settee.   I   remember,   as   I   closed   the   door 
behind me, a cold tremulousness seizing me, and a vague sense of being 
hated and lonely--vague and strong, like a presentiment.                   I know how I 
looked at that moment, for I saw myself in Bertha's thought as she lifted 
her    cutting    grey   eyes,   and    looked    at  me:     a   miserable     ghost-seer, 
surrounded by phantoms in the noonday, trembling under a breeze when 
the leaves were still, without appetite   for the common objects of   human 
desires,  but   pining   after the   moon-beams.         We   were   front   to   front   with 
each   other,   and   judged   each   other.     The   terrible   moment   of   complete 
illumination had come to me, and I saw that the darkness had hidden no 
landscape from me, but only a blank prosaic wall: from that evening forth, 
through   the sickening   years   which   followed,  I saw   all   round the   narrow 
room of this woman's soul--saw petty artifice and mere negation where I 
had delighted to believe in coy sensibilities and in wit at war with latent 
feeling--saw the light floating vanities of the girl defining themselves into 
the   systematic   coquetry,   the   scheming   selfishness,   of   the        woman--saw 
repulsion and antipathy harden into cruel hatred, giving pain only for the 
sake of wreaking itself. 
     For Bertha too, after her kind, felt the bitterness of disillusion. She had 
believed that my wild poet's passion for her would make me her slave; and 
that,   being   her   slave,   I   should   execute   her   will   in   all   things. With   the 
essential shallowness of a negative, unimaginative nature, she was unable 
to conceive the fact that sensibilities were anything else than weaknesses. 
She   had   thought   my   weaknesses   would   put   me   in   her   power,   and   she 
found them unmanageable forces.               Our positions were reversed.           Before 
marriage   she   had   completely   mastered   my   imagination,   for   she   was   a 
secret to me; and I created the unknown thought before which I trembled 
as if it were hers.      But now that her soul was laid open to me, now that I 
was compelled to share the privacy of her motives, to follow all the petty 
devices that preceded her words and acts, she found herself powerless with 
me,   except   to   produce   in   me   the   chill   shudder   of   repulsion--powerless, 
because I could be acted on by no lever within her reach.                    I was dead to 
worldly     ambitions,     to  social   vanities,    to  all  the  incentives    within    the 
compass of   her  narrow   imagination,  and   I   lived under influences   utterly 
invisible to her. 
     She was really pitiable to have such a husband, and so all the world 
thought.      A    graceful,    brilliant   woman,      like   Bertha,    who    smiled     on 
morning callers, made a figure in ball-rooms, and was capable of that light 
repartee   which,   from   such   a   woman,   is   accepted   as   wit,   was   secure   of 
carrying off all sympathy from a husband who was sickly, abstracted, and, 
as some suspected, crack- brained.             Even the servants in our house gave 
her    the  balance    of  their   regard   and    pity.  For    there   were    no   audible 
quarrels   between   us;   our   alienation,   our   repulsion   from   each   other,   lay 
within the silence of our own hearts; and if the mistress went out a great 
deal, and seemed to   dislike the master's society,  was it not natural,   poor 
thing?     The master was odd.          I was kind and just to my dependants, but I 
excited in them a shrinking, half-contemptuous pity; for this class of men 
and   women   are   but   slightly   determined   in   their   estimate   of   others   by 
general considerations, or even experience, of character.                   They judge of 
persons as they judge of coins, and value those who pass current at a high 
rate. 
     After a time I interfered so little with Bertha's habits that it might seem 
wonderful how her hatred towards me could grow so intense and active as 
it   did.  But   she   had   begun   to   suspect,   by   some   involuntary   betrayal   of 
mine, that there was an abnormal power of penetration in me--that fitfully, 
at least, I was strangely cognizant of her thoughts and intentions, and she 
began to be   haunted   by  a   terror   of   me,   which   alternated   every  now   and 
then with defiance.        She meditated continually how the incubus could be 
shaken   off   her   life--how   she   could   be   freed   from   this   hateful   bond   to   a 
being   whom   she   at     once   despised   as   an    imbecile,   and   dreaded   as     an 
inquisitor.     For    a  long    while   she   lived   in  the   hope    that  my    evident 
wretchedness   would   drive   me   to   the   commission   of   suicide;   but   suicide 
was not in my nature.          I was too completely swayed by the sense that I 
was in the grasp of unknown forces, to believe in my power of self-release. 
Towards my own destiny I had become entirely passive; for my one ardent 
desire     had    spent   itself,   and   impulse     no    longer    predominated       over 
knowledge.        For this reason I never thought of taking any steps towards a 
complete separation, which would have made our alienation evident to the 
world.      Why   should   I   rush   for   help   to   a   new   course,   when   I   was   only 
suffering from the consequences of a deed which had been the act of my 
intensest will?      That would have been the logic of one who had desires to 
gratify, and I had no desires.         But Bertha and I lived more and more aloof 
from each other.        The rich find it easy to live married and apart. 
     That course of our life which I have indicated in a few sentences filled 
the space   of   years.    So   much   misery--so   slow   and   hideous   a   growth   of 
hatred and sin, may be compressed into a sentence!                    And men judge of 
each   other's   lives   through   this   summary   medium.          They   epitomize   the 
experience of their fellow-mortal, and pronounce judgment on him in neat 
syntax,     and    feel  themselves      wise    and   virtuous--conquerors        over    the 
temptations      they   define    in  well-   selected    predicates.     Seven     years   of 
wretchedness glide glibly over the lips of the man who has never counted 
them out in moments of chill disappointment, of head and heart throbbings, 
of dread and vain wrestling, of remorse and despair.                 We learn WORDS 
by rote, but not their meaning; THAT must be paid for with our life-blood, 
and printed in the subtle fibres of our nerves. 
     But   I   will   hasten   to   finish   my   story. Brevity   is   justified   at   once   to 
those who readily understand, and to those who will never understand. 
     Some years after my father's death, I was sitting by the dim firelight in 
my library one January evening--sitting in the leather chair that used to be 
my father's--when Bertha appeared at the door, with a candle in her hand, 
and advanced towards me.             I knew the ball-dress she had on--the white 
ball-dress,   with   the   green   jewels,   shone   upon   by   the   light   of   the   wax 
candle     which     lit  up   the  medallion      of   the  dying    Cleopatra     on    the 
mantelpiece.       Why did she come to me before going out?                I had not seen 
her in the library, which was my habitual place for months.                  Why did she 
stand before me with the candle in her hand, with her cruel contemptuous 
eyes fixed on me, and the glittering serpent, like a familiar demon, on her 
breast?     For a  moment I  thought   this fulfilment of   my vision   at Vienna 
marked some dreadful crisis in my fate, but I saw nothing in Bertha's mind, 
as she stood before me, except scorn for the look of overwhelming misery 
with which I sat before her . . . "Fool, idiot, why don't you kill yourself, 
then?"--that was her thought.           But at length her thoughts reverted to her 
errand,   and    she   spoke   aloud.    The   apparently   indifferent     nature    of  the 
errand   seemed   to   make   a   ridiculous   anticlimax   to   my   prevision   and   my 
agitation. 
     "I have had to hire a new maid.            Fletcher is going to be married, and 
she  wants   me   to   ask   you   to   let   her   husband   have the   public-   house   and 
farm at Molton.        I wish him to have it.       You must give the promise now, 
because Fletcher is going to-morrow morning--and quickly, because I'm in 
a hurry." 
     "Very   well;   you   may   promise   her,"   I   said,   indifferently,   and   Bertha 
swept out of the library again. 
     I always shrank from the sight of a new person, and all the more when 
it was a person whose mental life was likely to weary my reluctant insight 
with worldly ignorant trivialities.          But I shrank especially from the sight 
of   this   new   maid,   because   her   advent   had   been   announced   to   me   at   a 
moment to which I could not cease to attach some fatality:                 I had a vague 
dread that I should find her mixed up with the dreary drama of my life-- 
that some new sickening vision would reveal her to me as an evil genius. 
When   at   last   I   did   unavoidably   meet   her,   the   vague   dread   was   changed 
into definite   disgust.     She was   a   tall, wiry,  dark-eyed woman,  this Mrs. 
Archer, with a face handsome enough to give her coarse hard nature the 
odious finish of bold, self-confident coquetry.             That was enough to make 
me avoid her, quite apart from the contemptuous feeling with which she 
contemplated   me.        I   seldom   saw   her;   but   I   perceived   that   she   rapidly 
became a favourite with her mistress, and, after the lapse of eight or nine 
months, I began to be aware that there had arisen in Bertha's mind towards 
this woman a mingled feeling of fear and dependence, and that this feeling 
was    associated     with   ill-  defined   images    of  candle-light    scenes    in  her 
dressing-room, and the locking-up of something in Bertha's cabinet.                     My 
interviews with my wife had become so brief and so rarely solitary, that I 
had   no   opportunity   of   perceiving   these   images   in   her   mind   with   more 
definiteness.      The    recollections    of   the  past   become     contracted    in  the 
rapidity    of   thought    till  they   sometimes      bear   hardly   a   more    distinct 
resemblance to the external reality than the forms of an oriental alphabet 
to the objects that suggested them. 
     Besides,   for    the  last   year  or  more    a   modification    had   been   going 
forward in my mental condition, and was growing more and more marked. 
My insight into the minds of those around me was becoming dimmer and 
more fitful, and the ideas that crowded my double consciousness became 
less and less dependent on any personal contact.               All that was personal in 
me seemed to be suffering a gradual death, so that I was losing the organ 
through which the personal agitations and projects of others could affect 
me.     But along with this relief from wearisome insight, there was a new 
development of what I concluded--as I have since found rightly--to be a 
provision of external scenes.         It was as if the relation between me and my 
fellow-men was more and more deadened, and my relation to what we call 
the inanimate   was   quickened into new   life. The   more   I lived   apart   from 
society, and in proportion as my wretchedness subsided from the violent 
throb   of   agonized   passion   into   the   dulness   of   habitual   pain,   the   more 
frequent   and   vivid   became   such   visions   as   that   I   had   had   of   Prague--of 
strange   cities,   of   sandy   plains,   of   gigantic   ruins,   of   midnight   skies   with 
strange bright constellations, of mountain-passes, of grassy nooks flecked 
with   the   afternoon   sunshine   through   the  boughs:          I  was   in   the   midst   of 
such scenes, and in all of them one presence seemed to weigh on me in all 
these   mighty   shapes--the   presence   of   something   unknown   and   pitiless. 
For continual suffering had annihilated religious faith within me:                       to the 
utterly    miserable--the       unloving     and    the   unloved--there       is  no   religion 
possible, no worship but a worship of devils.                 And beyond all these, and 
continually       recurring,     was    the   vision     of   my    death--the     pangs,     the 
suffocation, the last struggle, when life would be grasped at in vain. 
     Things   were   in   this   state   near   the   end   of   the   seventh   year.    I   had 
become entirely free from insight, from my abnormal cognizance of any 
other consciousness than   my own,  and instead of intruding   involuntarily 
into the world of other minds, was living continually in my own solitary 
future.     Bertha   was   aware that   I   was   greatly  changed.          To   my  surprise 
she had of late seemed to seek opportunities of remaining in my society, 
and had cultivated that kind of distant yet familiar talk which is customary 
between a husband and wife who live in polite and irrevocable alienation. 
I bore this with languid submission, and without feeling enough interest in 
her   motives   to   be   roused   into   keen      observation;   yet   I   could   not    help 
perceiving      something       triumphant      and   excited    in  her   carriage    and    the 
expression of her face--something too subtle to express itself in words or 
tones,  but giving   one  the  idea that   she lived   in   a  state  of  expectation  or 
hopeful   suspense.        My   chief   feeling   was   satisfaction   that   her   inner   self 
was once more shut out from me; and I almost revelled for the moment in 
the   absent   melancholy   that   made   me   answer   her   at   cross   purposes,   and 
betray utter ignorance of what she had been saying.                   I remember well the 
look   and   the   smile   with   which   she   one   day  said,   after   a   mistake   of   this 
kind on my part:          "I used to think you were a clairvoyant, and that was 
the reason why you were so bitter against other clairvoyants, wanting to 
keep your monopoly; but I see now you have become rather duller than 
the rest of the world." 
I said nothing in reply.       It occurred to me that her recent obtrusion of 
herself upon me might have been prompted by the wish to test my power 
of detecting some of her secrets; but I let the thought drop again at once: 
her motives and her deeds had no interest for me, and whatever pleasures 
she might be seeking, I had no wish to baulk her.                There was still pity in 
my   soul   for   every   living   thing,   and   Bertha   was   living--was   surrounded 
with possibilities of misery. 
     Just at this time there occurred an event which roused me somewhat 
from my inertia, and gave me an interest in the passing moment that I had 
thought impossible for me.           It was a visit from Charles Meunier, who had 
written me   word that he was coming to England for relaxation from too 
strenuous labour, and would like too see me. Meunier had now a European 
reputation;   but   his   letter   to   me   expressed   that   keen   remembrance   of   an 
early regard, an early debt of sympathy, which is inseparable from nobility 
of   character:    and   I   too   felt   as   if   his   presence   would   be   to   me   like   a 
transient resurrection into a happier pre-existence. 
     He came, and as far as possible, I renewed our old pleasure of making 
tete-a-tete   excursions,   though,   instead   of   mountains   and   glacers   and   the 
wide blue lake, we had to content ourselves with mere slopes and ponds 
and artificial plantations.        The years had changed us both, but with what 
different result!      Meunier was now a brilliant figure in society, to whom 
elegant women pretended to listen, and whose acquaintance was boasted 
of   by   noblemen      ambitious     of  brains.    He    repressed     with   the   utmost 
delicacy all betrayal of the shock which I am sure he must have received 
from   our    meeting,     or  of  a  desire   to  penetrate    into   my   condition    and 
circumstances, and sought by the utmost exertion of his charming social 
powers to make our reunion agreeable.                Bertha was much struck by the 
unexpected       fascinations    of   a  visitor  whom      she   had   expected     to  find 
presentable      only   on   the  score    of  his  celebrity,   and    put  forth   all  her 
coquetries and accomplishments.             Apparently she succeeded in attracting 
his   admiration,   for   his   manner   towards   her   was   attentive   and   flattering. 
The   effect   of   his   presence   on   me   was   so   benignant,   especially   in   those 
renewals   of   our   old   tete-a-tete   wanderings,   when   he   poured   forth   to   me 
wonderful narratives of his professional experience, that more than once, 
when his talk turned on the psychological relations of disease, the thought 
crossed   my   mind   that,   if   his   stay   with   me   were   long   enough,   I   might 
possibly bring myself to tell this man the secrets of my lot.                    Might there 
not lie some remedy for me, too, in his science?                  Might there not at least 
lie   some   comprehension   and   sympathy   ready   for             me   in   his   large   and 
susceptible mind?          But the   thought only flickered   feebly now and then, 
and died out before it could become a wish.                    The horror I had of again 
breaking   in   on   the   privacy   of   another   soul,   made   me,   by   an   irrational 
instinct, draw the shroud of concealment more closely around my own, as 
we automatically perform the gesture we feel to be wanting in another. 
     When Meunier's visit was approaching its conclusion, there happened 
an   event   which   caused  some   excitement   in   our   household,  owing   to   the 
surprisingly strong effect it appeared to produce on Bertha--on Bertha, the 
self-possessed,   who   usually   seemed   inaccessible   to   feminine   agitations, 
and   did   even   her   hate in   a self-restrained   hygienic   manner.          This   event 
was the sudden severe illness of her maid, Mrs. Archer.                      I have reserved 
to this moment the mention of a circumstance which had forced itself on 
my   notice   shortly   before   Meunier's   arrival,   namely,   that   there   had   been 
some quarrel between Bertha and this maid, apparently during a visit to a 
distant     family,    in  which     she   had    accompanied        her   mistress.     I   had 
overheard Archer   speaking   in   a   tone   of   bitter   insolence,   which   I   should 
have thought an adequate reason for immediate dismissal.                        No dismissal 
followed;   on   the   contrary,   Bertha   seemed   to   be   silently   putting   up   with 
personal inconveniences from the exhibitions of this woman's temper.                            I 
was   the   more   astonished   to   observe   that   her   illness   seemed   a   cause   of 
strong solicitude to Bertha; that she was at the bedside night and day, and 
would allow no one else to officiate as head-nurse.                   It happened that our 
family   doctor   was   out   on   a   holiday,   an   accident   which   made   Meunier's 
presence in the house doubly welcome, and he apparently entered into the 
case   with   an   interest   which   seemed   so   much   stronger   than   the   ordinary 
professional   feeling,   that   one   day   when   he   had   fallen   into   a   long   fit   of 
silence after visiting her, I said to him - 
     "Is this a very peculiar case of disease, Meunier?" 
     "No," he answered, "it is an attack of peritonitis, which will be fatal, 
but   which   does   not   differ   physically   from   many   other   cases   that   have 
come under my observation.              But I'll tell you what I have on my mind. 
I   want    to  make    an   experiment     on   this  woman,      if  you   will  give    me 
permission.       It can do her no harm--will give her no pain--for I shall not 
make it until life is extinct to all purposes of sensation.              I want to try the 
effect   of transfusing   blood   into   her   arteries   after   the   heart has   ceased   to 
beat for some minutes. I have tried the experiment again and again with 
animals that have died of this disease, with astounding results, and I want 
to try it on a human subject.          I have the small tubes necessary, in a case I 
have with me, and the rest of the apparatus could be prepared readily.                      I 
should use my own blood--take it from my own arm.                     This woman won't 
live through the night, I'm convinced, and I want you to promise me your 
assistance in making the experiment.             I can't do without another hand, but 
it   would   perhaps   not   be   well   to   call   in   a   medical   assistant   from   among 
your    provincial     doctors.    A   disagreeable      foolish   version    of  the   thing 
might get abroad." 
     "Have   you   spoken   to   my   wife   on   the   subject?"   I   said,   "because   she 
appears   to   be   peculiarly   sensitive   about   this   woman:       she   has   been   a 
favourite maid." 
     "To tell you the truth," said Meunier, "I don't want her to know about it. 
There are always insuperable difficulties with women in these matters, and 
the effect on the supposed dead body may be startling.                 You and I will sit 
up   together,   and   be   in   readiness.  When   certain   symptoms   appear   I   shall 
take you in, and at the right moment we must manage to get every one else 
out of the room." 
     I need not give our  farther conversation on   the subject.               He  entered 
very   fully   into   the   details,   and   overcame   my   repulsion   from   them,   by 
exciting in me a mingled awe and curiosity concerning the possible results 
of his experiment. 
     We prepared everything, and he instructed me in my part as assistant. 
He had not told Bertha of his absolute conviction that Archer would not 
survive through the  night, and   endeavoured   to   persuade her  to   leave the 
patient and take a night's rest.         But she was obstinate, suspecting the fact 
that death was at hand, and supposing that he wished merely to save her 
nerves.     She     refused    to  leave   the  sick-room.      Meunier       and   I  sat  up 
together   in   the   library,   he   making   frequent   visits   to   the   sick-room,   and 
returning     with   the   information     that   the  case   was    taking   precisely    the 
course he expected.         Once he said to me, "Can you imagine any cause of 
ill- feeling this woman has against her mistress, who is so devoted to her?" 
     "I   think   there   was   some   misunderstanding   between   them   before   her 
illness.    Why do you ask?" 
     "Because I have observed for the last five or six hours--since, I fancy, 
she has lost all hope of recovery--there seems a strange prompting in her 
to say something which pain and failing strength forbid her to utter; and 
there is a look of hideous meaning in her eyes, which she turns continually 
towards her mistress.         In   this disease   the mind often remains   singularly 
clear to the last." 
     "I   am   not   surprised   at   an   indication   of   malevolent   feeling   in   her,"   I 
said.    "She   is   a   woman   who   has   always   inspired   me   with   distrust   and 
dislike,  but   she   managed   to   insinuate herself  into   her   mistress's   favour." 
He was silent after this, looking at the fire with an air of absorption, till he 
went upstairs again.        He stayed away longer than usual, and on returning, 
said to me quietly, "Come now." 
     I followed him to the chamber where death was hovering.                      The dark 
hangings of the large bed made a background that gave a strong relief to 
Bertha's pale face as I entered.          She started forward as she saw me enter, 
and then looked at   Meunier with   an   expression of  angry inquiry;   but   he 
lifted up his hand as it to impose silence, while he fixed his glance on the 
dying woman and felt her pulse. The face was pinched and ghastly, a cold 
perspiration was on the   forehead,  and the eyelids   were lowered so   as   to 
conceal   the   large   dark   eyes.     After   a   minute   or   two,   Meunier   walked 
round to the other side of the bed where Bertha stood, and with his usual 
air of gentle politeness towards her begged her to leave the patient under 
our care--everything should be done for her--she was no longer in a state 
to   be   conscious     of   an  affectionate     presence.     Bertha     was    hesitating, 
apparently   almost   willing   to   believe   his   assurance   and   to   comply.      She 
looked round at the ghastly dying face, as if to read the confirmation of 
that assurance, when for a moment the lowered eyelids were raised again, 
and it seemed as if the eyes were looking towards Bertha, but blankly.                        A 
shudder   passed   through   Bertha's   frame,   and   she   returned   to   her   station 
near the pillow, tacitly implying that she would not leave the room. 
     The   eyelids   were   lifted   no   more.      Once   I   looked   at   Bertha   as   she 
watched   the   face   of   the   dying   one.    She   wore   a   rich   peignoir,   and   her 
blond   hair   was   half   covered   by   a   lace   cap:    in   her   attire   she   was,   as 
always, an elegant woman, fit to figure in a picture of modern aristocratic 
life:   but I asked myself how that face of hers could ever have seemed to 
me   the   face   of   a   woman   born   of   woman,   with   memories   of   childhood, 
capable   of   pain,     needing   to   be   fondled?     The   features    at   that  moment 
seemed   so   preternaturally   sharp,   the   eyes   were   so   hard   and   eager--she 
looked like a cruel immortal, finding her spiritual feast in the agonies of a 
dying race.       For across those hard features there came something like a 
flash   when   the   last   hour   had   been   breathed   out,   and   we   all   felt   that   the 
dark veil had completely fallen.             What secret was there between Bertha 
and this woman?          I turned my eyes from her with a horrible dread lest my 
insight    should     return,   and   I  should    be   obliged    to  see   what    had   been 
breeding about two unloving women's hearts.                   I felt that Bertha had been 
watching for the moment of death as the sealing of her secret:                      I thanked 
Heaven it could remain sealed for me. 
     Meunier said quietly, "She is gone."              He then gave his arm to Bertha, 
and she submitted to be led out of the room. 
     I suppose it was at her order that two female attendants came into the 
room,     and    dismissed     the   younger     one   who     had   been    present    before. 
When they entered, Meunier had already opened the artery in the long thin 
neck that lay rigid on the pillow, and I dismissed them, ordering them to 
remain at a distance till we rang:            the doctor, I said, had an operation to 
perform--he was not sure about the death.                For the next twenty minutes I 
forgot   everything   but   Meunier   and   the   experiment   in   which   he   was   so 
absorbed, that I think his senses would have been closed against all sounds 
or sights which had no relation to it.           It was my task at first to keep up the 
artificial respiration in the body after the transfusion had been effected, but 
presently Meunier relieved me, and I could see the wondrous slow return 
of   life;   the   breast   began   to   heave,   the   inspirations   became   stronger,   the 
eyelids   quivered,   and   the   soul   seemed   to   have   returned   beneath   them. 
The   artificial   respiration   was   withdrawn:       still   the   breathing   continued, 
and there was a movement of the lips. 
     Just   then   I   heard   the   handle   of   the   door   moving: I   suppose   Bertha 
had   heard   from   the   women   that   they   had   been   dismissed:        probably   a 
vague fear had arisen in her mind, for she entered with a look of alarm. 
She came to the foot of the bed and gave a stifled cry. 
     The     dead    woman's     eyes    were    wide    open,    and   met    hers   in   full 
recognition--the   recognition   of   hate.        With   a   sudden   strong   effort,   the 
hand that Bertha had thought for ever still was pointed towards her, and 
the haggard face moved.           The gasping eager voice said-- 
     "You   mean   to   poison   your   husband   .   .   .   the   poison   is   in   the   black 
cabinet . . . I got it for you . . . you laughed at me, and told lies about me 
behind my back, to make me disgusting . . . because you were jealous . . . 
are you sorry . . . now?" 
     The lips continued to murmur, but the sounds were no longer distinct. 
Soon there was no sound--only a slight movement:                    the flame had leaped 
out, and was being extinguished the faster.              The wretched woman's heart- 
strings had been set to hatred and vengeance; the spirit of life had swept 
the chords for an instant, and was gone again for ever.                   Great God!        Is 
this what it is to live again . . . to wake up with our unstilled thirst upon us, 
with our unuttered curses rising to our lips, with our muscles ready to act 
out their half-committed sins? 
     Bertha     stood   pale   at  the   foot  of   the  bed,   quivering     and   helpless, 
despairing      of  devices,    like  a  cunning     animal    whose     hiding-places     are 
surrounded by  swift-advancing flame.               Even   Meunier looked   paralysed; 
life for that moment ceased to be a scientific problem to him.                  As for me, 
this scene   seemed   of   one   texture   with   the   rest of   my   existence:     horror 
was     my   familiar,   and    this  new    revelation    was   only    like  an   old  pain 
recurring with new circumstances. 
     * * * 
     Since     then     Bertha    and     I  have     lived    apart--she     in   her    own 
neighbourhood, the mistress of half our wealth, I as a wanderer in foreign 
countries, until I came to this Devonshire nest to die. Bertha lives pitied 
and admired; for what had I against that   charming woman, whom  every 
one but myself could have been happy with?                There had been no witness 
of the scene in the dying room except Meunier, and while Meunier lived 
his lips were sealed by a promise to me. 
     Once or twice, weary of wandering,   I rested in a favourite spot,   and 
my heart went out towards the men and women and children whose faces 
were becoming familiar to me; but I was driven away again in terror at the 
approach of my old insight--driven away to live continually with the one 
Unknown Presence revealed and yet hidden by the moving curtain of the 
earth and sky.      Till at last disease took hold of me and forced me to rest 
here--forced   me   to   live   in   dependence   on   my   servants.    And   then   the 
curse of insight--of my double consciousness, came again, and has never 
left me.    I know all their narrow thoughts, their feeble regard, their half- 
wearied pity. 
     * * * 
     It   is   the 20th   of   September,  1850.  I know   these   figures   I   have   just 
written, as if they were a long familiar inscription.            I have seen them on 
this   pace   in   my   desk   unnumbered   times,   when   the   scene   of   my   dying 
struggle has opened upon me . . . 
     (1859) 

                                        